---
short_name: winter
name: Assessing and Visualizing the Impact of Inclusivity Organizing in Digital Games
pi: Alison Harvey
---

The project entails a partnership with the Montréal-based community group Pixelles, a 10-year-old non-profit that has been a leader in programming initiatives aimed at increasing the participation of women and other marginalized people in games. We are engaging in evaluation of what EDI-focused organizations in games might be able to achieve as well as their challenges in meeting these objectives. The research also aims to provide the basis for a community discussion of how best to assess, evaluate, and report the impact of organizing for inclusivity based on a feminist rather than business-oriented approach to impact.  

This project aims to provide critical insight into how to evaluate the short-, medium-, and long-term impact of community organizing for inclusion in exclusionary industries through the case of digital games. We have already undertaken qualitative interviews with participants in diverse Pixelles initiatives from over the last ten years on the impact of their participation and how they understand the role of organizing for inclusivity in creating structural change and defining impact from a feminist perspective. After analysis of these interviews, we then organized a community workshop with members of the Pixelles community oriented towards developing feminist methodologies for tracking and reporting impact of inclusivity organizing. Enabling the participation of the community was seen as useful for providing further insight into feminist methodologies for assessing impact and direction for further action research on community-oriented modes of reporting, visualizing, and disseminating impact.  

Through these discussions, we learned that the impact of the organization’s activities and its community cannot simply be captured under simple quantitative metrics such as numbers of games created and people entering into the games industry (though these are common outcomes). Instead, our participants expressed broader impacts, including personal (such as combatting feelings of isolation supporting reaching one’s goals through a sense of belonging), community (challenging exclusionary norms through the provision of spaces that are positive, protective, and validating), professional (creating new networks of support and mentorship), and industry-based (enabling marginalized people to claim space in the industry and holding it accountable).  

Based on these insights from the interviews, we ran a co-design workshop with members of the Pixelles community focused on two question- how can we effectively communicate the impacts the organization has, and how can we do so in a manner that is consent-driven and safe for the community?  

In this next phase of the research, we are seeking to work with community researchers to help us visualize the models and frameworks designed by the participants for presentation purposes at future workshops with the community as well as at industry events, as we are interested in exploring how these strategies for assessing and communicating impact can be taken up by other groups and organizations working on inclusion in games to support their projects.