---
short_name: spring
name: "Constellation Archeology: Developing a Feminist Visualization Game for Inclusivity Organizing’s Impacts"
pi: Alison Harvey
---

The project entails a partnership with the Montréal-based community group Pixelles, a 10-year-old non-profit that has been a leader in programming initiatives aimed at increasing the participation of women and other marginalized people in games. We are engaging in evaluation of how best to assess, evaluate, and report the impact of organizing for inclusivity based on a feminist rather than business-oriented approach to impact.  

This project aims to provide critical insight into how to evaluate the short-, medium-, and long-term impact of community organizing for inclusion in exclusionary industries through the case of digital games. We have already undertaken qualitative interviews with participants in diverse Pixelles initiatives from over the last ten years on the impact of their participation and how they understand the role of organizing for inclusivity in creating structural change and defining impact from a feminist perspective. After analysis of these interviews, we then organized a community workshop with members of the Pixelles community oriented towards developing feminist methodologies for tracking and reporting impact of inclusivity organizing. Enabling the participation of the community was seen as useful for providing further insight into feminist methodologies for assessing impact and direction for further action research on community-oriented modes of reporting, visualizing, and disseminating impact.

Based on insights from the interviews, we ran two co-design workshop with members of the Pixelles community focused on two question- how can we effectively communicate the impacts the organization has, and how can we do so in a manner that is consent-driven and safe for the community? In the second workshop we were able to display the prototype created by Soft Chaos which allowed us to verify community buy-in, which is why we are confident in proceeding with the full build. At the Game Developers Conference in March 2023 we were able to show the mock-up and early prototype which also confirmed the value of the existing material and broader interest in further development of the tool.  

In this next phase of the research, we are want to continue to work with these community researchers to finalize the prototype they created, including inputting data from our interviews and building out the user interaction interface. A full build will not only help Pixelles achieve their goals of visualizing the impact of ten years of organizing, but will also enable us to network with other groups and organizations working on inclusion in games and creative technology projects more broadly to support their projects.