---
short_name: spring
name: Listening to Social Transformation through Engagement
pi: Rebecca Caines
---

This project examines listening, in particular digital listening, and its role in social transformation. I am working towards a SSHRC Partnership grant on this topic as co-director with Ellen Waterman at Carleton, that has multiple sites and projects and is being submitted in Fall 2023. Along with building and planning the Partnership which will be based in Markham, my own projects as part of this grant include: LISTEN Lab (building a new research creation lab on listening, sound art, and community engagement at the new Markham campus) and "Art, Tech, Education and Listening to the Land," a research project with Indigenous partners in the York Region examining how sound and creative technologies can be used in experiential education and other community-based creative partnerships to address colonial legacies, and support thriving Indigenous communities in partnership with universities. We started “Art Tech Education and Listening to the Land” in March this year with meetings with Indigenous Elders and artists and youth in Markham, and presentations by community leaders at the ROM. This research project works in tandem with an AIF consultation project to support future Experiential Education in our new AMPD Creative Technologies program. Two future initiatives planned for Markham are sound based AR projects connected to Indigenous land markers, and improvised music/soundscape work made in community with Indigenous youth and Elders, to support an Anishnaabe language and cultural healing metaverse project currently under construction.  
  
Listening is often invoked as a key to understanding. It is a ubiquitous activity linked to discernment, empathy, critical analysis, leadership, and emotional affect. Listening is bound up with communication, technology, health and wellness, education, governance, and arts and entertainment. But listening is frequently deployed in performative, token, or coercive ways - as in empty consultations when a decision has already been taken, or audio surveillance. A lack of critical listening skills leads to misunderstandings and conflict. Creative practices in music and sound arts (including creative technologies, communications media, film, and recording) offer a rich experiential ground for understanding, critiquing, and deploying listening as a crucial strategy, skill, technique, and force to address the competing cross currents of transformation that mark Canadian society. It all begins with listening in community.  

Through scholarship, empirical research, and community-engaged research-creation in music and sound arts,  LiSTEN seeks to:  
● better understand and articulate the complex social dynamics of listening as technique, practice, and metaphor;  
● work with community partners to mobilize listening as a strategy for social transformation;  
● examine and evaluate the effects of social transformation on communities and public institutions;  
● foster practices of nuanced and critical listening vital to navigating wicked problems and polarization that affect Canada at home and internationally.