---
short_name: spring
name: Marginal MediaWorks
pi: Taien Ng-Chan
---

My Marginal MediaWorks project will cultivate and mobilize knowledge around marginality and emergent media to under-represented artists of various identities (including race, gender and disability) and the arts-based organizations that serve them. This will increase diversity, capacity, and equitable participation in the creative media industries. My methodological approaches and corresponding research activities are tailored specifically for each of my research program’s objectives:  
  
1. Experiment with emergent media technologies to produce new works, modes of storytelling and interaction that centres the marginal. Art, activism and community can be powerful ways to counter systemic racism, discrimination and anti-Asian hate (Kuo et. al. 2020), illustrating why a research-creation approach is necessary. Narratives (linear and nonlinear) are an important part of place-making and identity-building. My research expands inquiry into how dominant narratives and stereotypes might be changed through providing and privileging alternate points of view. Innovations in world-making through immersive storytelling and interactive media arts advances knowledge of emergent media production. I am particularly interested in dome technology and room-scale VR as modes of theatrical gathering and shared experience – something that is not the same with headset experiences that are more solitary in nature. Outside of planetariums and the Satosphere dome theatre in Montreal, there are few projection domes being used in research-creation in Canada, so I am currently developing two small domes at York as the basis for ongoing experiments in live performance/motion capture and immersive environment/set design.  
2. Build the Marginal MediaWorks studio-lab, housed at York University, that will build capacity to grow for further iteration, to expand community partnerships, apply for further funding, continue training for students from marginalized groups to diversify the industry in Ontario, and produce new content for distribution, exhibition and performance. Marginal MediaWorks will be located in the Performance and Media Collaboratory that is currently being set up in AMPD.  
3. Co-develop and launch a prototype digital platform for virtual collaboration and exchange, to build community and solidarity with marginalized groups. This builds off my current SSHRC Race, Gender, Diversity Initiative Grant (2022-2025) for which I am Co-PI and Co-Director, called “The Sari-Sari Xchange: Building Asian Diasporic Community Through Emergent Media.” This SSHRC RGDI project partners with Centre3 for Social+Artistic Practice, the Toronto Reel Asian International Film Festival and Tangled Arts+Disability to develop training modules, co-create works, exhibitions and outreach opportunities, while building community-led, anti-oppression strategies and accessibility.