---
short_name: winter
name: Photography and Biopolitics
pi: Gabrielle Moser
---

Photography and Biopolitics seeks to deepen our understanding of the contradictory roles that photography plays in contemporary society as a seemingly immaterial technology with very real material consequences. To do so, the project engages the discourse of biopolitics to better understand photography’s relationship to identity, visibility and embodiment. Biopolitics, as first articulated by Michel Foucault, describes “a knowledge-power relation in which life itself and the course and processes of living are central to dynamics of power.... [It] refers to a range of institutions and practices designed to normalize the quality of life of human beings” (Steinmann 2011: 91). Imaging technologies such as closed-circuit television (CCTV) surveillance, Google Street View mapping, biometric screening in airports, and facial recognition software in smart phones are only some of the ways photography has been used to map and measure embodiment: technologies of biopower that are even more prominent in our daily lives under the conditions of global pandemic.

To understand these conditions, my project pursues three related questions: 1) How has photography captured and catalogued the social body of early 21st century North America?; 2) How have contemporary artists intervened in this cataloguing of which bodies matter?; and 3) How do young people understand and speak back to these photographic regimes and artists’ responses to them?

The objectives of this research involve scholarly, public engagement and pedagogical outcomes. The scholarly aims focus on advancing knowledge by: (1a) analyzing the changing role of photography in biopolitics, particularly through the rise of social media and enhanced techniques of (self-) surveillance; and (1b) understanding how race, gender, sexuality, class, ability and other questions of power and privilege play into these concerns around visibility and embodiment for both artists and young people. The public outreach goals of the project aim to (2a) disseminate findings about how students negotiate their experiences of embodiment through lens-based technologies; and (2b) enrich public understanding of how photography shapes our perception of which bodies are worthy of protection.

To achieve its objectives, the first phase of the project analyzes works by contemporary artists who appropriate the image technologies of biopolitical control to undermine them, demonstrating photography’s dangers but also its subversive potential. The applicant and graduate student researchers will interview six artists to understand the strategies they use to subvert lens-based technologies, and turn the findings into a series of freely available podcast episodes. The podcasts will be available as curriculum tools for high school students and teachers, and will form the basis of a scholarly monograph with MIT Press.