---
short_name: spring
name: Viral Interventions
pi: John Greyson
---
Viral Interventions (VI) is a research-creation project that critically studies new methods for artists, communities and activists to work together, making films about urgent AIDS realities today. How do we navigate the considerable challenges of collaboration, when differing priorities, aesthetics and tactics (pedagogical, artistic, political) can place them at odds? How do we strike a balance between artistic independence and ethical engagement? What new hybrid cinema forms can emerge from such exchanges and differences? Why do we keep opening this door? VI explores the fertile possibilities of such collaborations, developing and testing innovative methods for making meaningful AIDS films that engage with our local and global realities today.  
  
Now in it's 3rd of 4 years, VI commissions small cohorts of 6-8 artists-researchers per year to work together, studying methods of research-creation related to HIV+ media and creating new urgent videos about living with HIV today. The 1st year cohort (Esery Mondesir, Samuel Lopez, Lesley Chan, Zachery Longboy, Mikiki, Andrew Zealley, Christian Hui) completed their videos and related research projects in March 2022, and have been screening/presenting their research at venues/festivals in Toronto, Montreal, and New York. The 2nd year cohort (Alexis Gelis, Amil Shivji, Atefeh Khademolreza, Jamie Whitecrow, Dakota, Darien Taylor, Alison Duke, Ken Morrison) are at fine cut stage on their edits, with their monthly series of workshops concluding in two weeks.  
  
Viral Interventions is a direct response to 1991's innovative Toronto Living With AIDS project, co-produced by John Greyson and Michael Balser, which commissioned Toronto artists to partner with community groups, creating original half-hour films (dramas, docs, hybrids) about AIDS realities within at-risk communities. That series captured the raw passions of the moment, when widespread bigotry, misinformation and the lack of viable treatments forced activists into the streets. Three decades and many films later, the disease has evolved into a vastly different pandemic, one that we tend to experience today (both on screen and in our lives) as a north/south binary. In the global north, AIDS is considered by many governments, activists and big pharma to be a chronic, manageable condition, with new prophylactic treatments on the verge of conquering HIV transmission. In contrast, in the global south, and especially in Africa where 95% of new infections occur, AIDS remains (after Covid) the world's deadliest viral killer with 700,000 deaths and 1.7 million new infections every year.  
  
Viral Interventions research-creation projects will variously complicate and question this binary through the engagement of four urgent contemporary optics: (1) the unfolding devastation of Covid; (2) the dizzying multi-platform challenges of digital cultures; (3) the momentum of new movements for decolonization, anti-oppression and anti-racist justice; (4) the activism that exposes big pharma's apartheid-like regime of unequal access to treatment drugs globally. VI brings together artists, communities and activists in a complex dialogue about ethics and aesthetics, urgency and agency, collaboration and compromise, grappling with these optics (and with a previous generation's complex experiences of artist/community/activist collaboration).