**Preamble and Overview**

This comprehensive exam plan focuses on the following themes: cosmotechnics/cosmopolitics as cultural communication, “chronotopic practices” (Peeren, 2006, p. 71) as cultural transmission, and cultural anthropology to examine how cultural practices and diasporic identity interact in the context of communication and media studies. The identified areas are unified through the following assumption: belonging in a diasporic group engenders a specific kind of subjectivity which is mobilized and reinforced through a range of cultural practices, practices that have usually not been studied in communication and media studies. Furthermore, this comprehensive exam plan relies on an understanding of diasporic identities as identities which are informed and constituted “historically through expressive culture, politics, thought and tradition, in which experiential and representational resources are mobilized from the imaginaries of both the old and the new world” (Zeleza, 2005, p. 41). This comprehensive exam plan consists of a discussion of the rationale and scope for each identified field and a preliminary reading list which reflects the themes of each section. In each identified area, the proposed reading list consists of a set of foundational and contemporary texts. Where necessary, the reading list also includes a set of texts focused on discussing methodology and case studies. This organizing framework is especially relevant for the major specific and minor fields. This is done in order to further contextualize the areas of study and the questions proposed therein.

**MAJOR GENERAL (Media & Culture): Decolonizing communications studies**
#majorgeneral
*Rationale & Scope*

The proposed major specific field focuses on the following areas: cosmotechnics, cosmopolitics, and cultural communication. These themes are identified in order to excavate a decolonial reading of communication and media studies scholarship. This is done primarily by putting foundational texts in conversation with scholarship that critiques and extends the ideas presented in these texts. This is done in part because of the “abyssal” nature of continental scholarship (de Sousa Santos, 2007). Boaventura de Sousa Santos describes modern[[1]](#_ftn1) western thinking as ‘abyssal thinking’ (p. 45). Abyssal thinking relies on the dismissal and invisibalizing of non-western epistemological traditions and the peoples from which they emerge. He argues that abyssal thinking reinscribes itself through a normative understanding of the social and historical development of the ‘West’, its institutions, and its intellectual trajectories. Part of the rationale for proposing this major general is the recognition that these abyssal lines extend to scholarship in media and communication studies. This major general field, then, is invested in a sustained discussion of how epistemological abysses render things, peoples, and knowledges invisible. The major general has also been identified in an attempt to argue for the inclusion of communicative practices that have historically been overlooked by the field. The positioning of the texts selected for this general field is meant to generate productive conversations between the philosophy of communications and media studies and decolonial approaches to communications theory.

The major general field focuses on identifying alternative scholarly approaches to cultural communication. As indicated by the title, the main claim at play here is that there exist other genealogies of communication and media studies. By positioning cosmotechnics and cosmopolitics as cultural communication, this major general reinvigorates the field with non-traditional scholarship. Furthermore, the texts compiled here are reflective of most of the existing critiques of media and communications studies as a whole. This major general field approaches scholarship from a dialogical perspective which positions scholarship and knowledge production as a revolutionary practice (Freire, 2000).

The juxtaposition that underlines the bibliography supporting the rationale for this major specific field also relies on an understanding of cosmotechnics as a conceptual framework that while, it emerges in the work of Yuk Hui, is indicative of a more pressing need for an approach to communication and media studies that is _pluriversal_ in nature. In other words, there is an urgent need for a theoretical approach to communications and media studies that acknowledges the existence of different historical and epistemological trajectories. As such, this major general field operates on two separate but related levels. On the first hand, it establishes a corpus of foundational texts and approaches to media and cultural studies that fall under what de Sousa Santos (2007) describes as abyssal thinking. On the second hand, it attempts to identify alternate sociotechnical histories through a reading of texts focused on critiquing and extending the arguments made in the foundational readings as discussed above. This bilateral approach allows for the emergence of a cosmotechnical approach to cultural communication. Part of the work of this major general then will happen as the foundational corpus is put into conversation with the rest of the reading list through a set of questions designed to guide thinking about what it means to be a communications and media studies scholar. This critique of the conceptual foundations of media and communications studies does not aim to reject these texts and authors who have been able to identify and comment on the Western tradition of the field. Rather, it aims to recognize the existence of alternate conceptual traditions that are as expansive and foundational to non-western cultural communication.

	de Sousa Santos (2007) uses the term modern as a socio-historical marker. Here, “modern western thinking” refers to  the intellectual traditions originating in the Enlightenment which continue to make up what is known as academe in the contemporary sense.


**Questions**

Traditional approaches to communication and media studies tend to view communication through a universalizing lens. How does a pluriversal approach promote a view of communication and media studies “where many worlds fit” (de la Cadena & Blaser, 2018)?

Boaventura de Sousa Santos (2007) describes “modern western thinking” (p. 47) as abyssal. Compare the abyssal approach to contemporary pluriversal approaches to communications theory.

Theorization about communication in non-Western societies has been informed by the concept of “modernization”. Outline the criticisms that caused this model to fall out of favour and the alternative presented by a decolonial approach to non-Western communication.


---

**MAJOR SPECIFIC (Media & Culture): Cultural communications in/and the Black diaspora**
#majorspecific

*Rationale & Scope*

The proposed major specific field has been identified because of the singular experience of the Black diaspora. Rather than focusing on the concept of diaspora writ large, the focus is placed on the Black diaspora in recognition of 1) the different geographies and ethnicities that make up the diaspora and 2) the range of diasporic cultural practices practiced therein. Diasporic communities are important specifically because diasporic subjects have to mitigate belonging to multiple communities in different ways. Whether focusing on diasporas more generally or one racial or ethnic group, transmission of cultural practices is central in creating and fostering belonging in diasporic communities.

This desire for specificity is also the result of how Black diasporic communities have been defined in diaspora studies. While most diasporic communities are formed as a result of displacement or mass emigration from a given country, the experience of the Black diaspora is unique in many ways. The Black diaspora consists of both descendants of enslaved Africans and African immigrants who might have left their home country for a range of social, political, or financial reasons. The transatlantic slave trade and the scramble for Africa have created passageways between many African countries, colonies, and the colonizing entity. One can think of the 1950’s Windrush generation in the United Kingdom, immigration and work schemes between France and its many former colonies or more recent patterns of migration between Africa, Europe, and the Americas caused by social and political unrest. On the other hand, descendants of enslaved Africans in the United States might also consider themselves part of the Black diaspora although they do not have any “African relatives” or have never visited the continent.

The “cultural amnesia thesis”, most often proposed when discussing the Black diaspora, frames the Middle Passage as an event which created an unreachable divide between sub-Saharan Africa and its emerging diasporic communities (Brathwaite, 1981). The idea of total separation proposed by scholars like Brathwaite has continuously been challenged by others in the field such as Maureen Warner-Lewis. She refutes the “cultural amnesia” hypothesis which proposes that for their own survival diasporic communities, especially those formed out of forced displacement, completely break from their community of origin, and simply integrate the host community. Without discounting the traumatic nature of enslavement and forcible removal, she argues that enslaved Africans were able to maintain and foster communal bonds in part because slaveholders preferred to acquire slaves from specific geographic regions (most commonly regions of the African continent now known as West and Central Africa). Furthermore, diasporic communities engage in what Peeren (2006) defines as chronotopic practices. Diasporic cultural practices that are considered chronotopic “interpellate subjects in(to) collective spaces and in(to) collective time through specific spatial and temporal norms” and cultural practices (Peeren, 2006, p. 71). These practices involve a disruption of space-time which, in turn, creates spaces where identity, race, and the tension between the country of origin and the host country are constantly negotiated. The chronotopic space amplifies tensions between the multiple, and often contradictory, identities of members of these diasporic communities. Furthermore, her conceptualization of diasporic chronotopic practices is in fact closely related Homi Bhabha’s work on the third space (Bhabha, 1990). This space exists and is created, on the one hand, because of  the tensions between belonging both the host and the country or origin and, on the other, because of a sense of disconnect between both the country of origin and the host-country.

As such, developing a firm understanding of the major ways belonging and cultural transmission have been defined in this field of inquiry are necessary to understand the unique experiences of the Black diaspora. Developing my understanding of this field through the comprehensive examination will not only allow me to understand how to situate hair braiding as a diasporic chronotopic practice but it will also allow me to further engage with and identify key scholarship in the emerging field that is Canadian Black studies. As such, while the texts highlighted here tend to focus on the United States and the United Kingdom, a sustained engagement with the existing scholarship can help identify what is missing in the Canadian context.

**Questions**

How have identity and belonging been conceptualized in diaspora studies?

What role do cultural practices play in fostering diasporic identity?

How has postcolonial thought disrupted narratives of belonging and identity in diaspora studies?

---
**MINOR (Constructed Minor): Media anthropology (towards an anthropology of media)**
#minor

**Rationale & Scope**

The minor field identified focuses on the following themes: cultural anthropology and sensory ethnography. This minor has been selected, in part, because of the potential for productive tensions in positioning the work of communications scholars and anthropologists who work at the intersection of what is known as media anthropology. Specifically, the differences in theoretical and methodological approaches in how media and technology are understood and approached in each field. It is for that reason that Rothenbuhler (2008) propose that we treat media anthropology as “a territory of contact between two fields, giving rise to a moment of inter-disciplinary discussion” (p. 2). As a “territory of contact” media anthropology attends to the study of media and technology in culture using theoretical frameworks that bridge media anthropology with other disciplines while maintaining it as its own subfield within cultural anthropology more generally. This is done in an effort to acknowledge that while those operating in the field of media anthropology might not come from fields with similar epistemological and methodological trajectories, their interests converge through scholarly engagements with media.

Rothenbulher (2008) identifies five trends in media anthropology scholarship: 1) more recent systematic study of media by anthropologist; 2) communications scholars who use anthropological concepts and methods to study media and technology; 3) media scholarship influenced by “the ethnographic turn” in the humanities at large; 4) “visual anthropologists and ethnographic filmmakers who had been pursuing many of these interests in their own way, under the guidance of another set of questions and conceptual vocabularies”; and 5) scholarly discussions of media while using “an abstractly anthropological orientation, informed by anthropological reading but not its methods” (pp. 2-3). Given this discussion, the headings cultural anthropology and sensory ethnography were selected intended to capture the usefulness of this minor in thinking about the usefulness of different scholarly traditions when thinking about how media and technology operate in society. This minor field has also been identified to engage with the debates and tensions that animate this field such as what constitutes media archeology and its purpose as a field on inquiry (Peterson, 2009; Postill, 2009a, 2009b).

The minor field has also been selected for its methodological insights, specifically as they relate to sensory ethnography. Sensory experiences have become increasingly important in studies of everyday life and the cultural practices therein. Sensory ethnography has allowed scholars to deeply study those practices which have been relegated to the realm of the unextraordinary and which are meaningful in so far as they happen every day. Furthermore, sensory ethnography necessitates a reconsideration of sensory perception as central to human experience. It is precisely the fact that everyday sensuous practices are often dismissed as mundane or ordinary that makes them interesting to those invested in sensory ethnography. These mundane experiences are methodologically and epistemologically interesting for ethnographers since offers up the space to think through how cultural practices eventually become ordinary and mundane. Here, another debate between David Howes, Sarah Pink, and Tim Ingold on sensory ethnography form a foundation for my interest in sensory ethnography.

**Questions**

Rothenbuhler (2008) proposes that we treat media anthropology as a “a territory of contact between two fields” (communications/media studies and cultural anthropology) rather than an interdisciplinary field of study in itself. How does this approach position both communications/media studies and cultural anthropology understand media?

Sarah Pink (2009/2015) defines sensory ethnography as “a way of thinking about and doing ethnography that takes as its starting point the multisensoriality of experience, perception, knowing and practice” (p. xii). On the other hand, David Howes (2010) accuses Pink of “a good deal of shadow boxing, aiming blows at an ‘anthropology of the senses’ that exists solely in her imagination” (p. 333) in her attempt to establish sensory ethnography as a field. Describe the theoretical roots of sensory anthropology and sensory ethnography, its divergence as well as this critique brought forward by Howes.

If ethnography can be fined as “sensory in nature” (Pink, 2009) is all ethnography already sensory? Said differently, is the adjective “sensory” redundant? Describe the differences between _sensory ethnography_ and _ethnography_, its epistemological foundations, and potential uses for the work of anthropologists?
	Might be too similar to question 2

---

